---
title: 'Managed Hosting vs. a VPS'
description: 'When is managed hosting or a VPS the right choice'
draft: true
---
Managed Hosting vs. a VPS
===

## The gist

**Managed hosting** is a good option for people with less technical experience.
**Self-hosting** is a good option if you enjoy technology or have experience
programming or managing servers.

## Servers

A *server* is a computer running a program (such as Mastodon or PeerTube) that
interacts with *clients* (such as your laptop or phone) over the internet.

Generally, servers are reachable at all times. They can be a physical computer
located in your house (though there are security risks in this that you should
know), or hosted in a *datacenter* (a professionally managed location providing
space, power, cooling, and internet access for servers).

## VPS

A *virtual private server* (VPS) is a server hosted in a datacenter as a
virtual machine - a virtual computer that shares hardware resources (CPU,
memory, etc.) with other VPSs. It's generally the simplest, cheapest kind of
professionally managed server you can get.

> **Virtual machine?** Because Consultatron is a small company, they don't have
> their own servers on-premises - that would mean a large upfront cost to buy
> the servers, as well as work to keep them maintained. So they pay someone
> else to run their servers - they can access them from the comfort of their
> office and do the same things they would do otherwise on them.

> **Info**: For the most part, if you can host something on a VPS, you can also
> host it out of your house on a computer you own. This can help you save on
> hosting expenses, but it will increase your electricity consumption. It's a
> bit harder (involving port forwarding) and could also open you up to some
> security risks, so we won't cover it in this guide, but it is possible.

### System requirements

The kind of VPS you need depends heavily on the scale your instance will run
at. If you're just running a small instance (of either Mastodon or PeerTube)
for yourself or your friends, you can get away with as little as 1 (virtual
CPU) core and 1.5 GB of RAM. If you intend to run a big instance (lots of
users, or for PeerTube, lots of viewers), you need to scale up your
hardware accordingly.

For PeerTube specially, you will need additional resources (as of writing, the
documentation suggests 8 vCores and 8 GB of RAM)

### Hosting Mastodon on a VPS

If you're comfortable with Linux server administration, the Mastodon setup
process is [well documented](https://docs.joinmastodon.org/user/run-your-own/).
You'll need to install some prerequisites, set up a database, and download and
configure a web server and set the Mastodon server app up on it.

### Hosting PeerTube on a VPS

Setting up PeerTube on a VPS is quite similar to setting up Mastodon - although
it takes some time, you can do it if you're somewhat familiar with the Linux
command line. You can view the [official
documentation](https://docs.joinpeertube.org/#create-your-own-instance) to know
how to do it.

## Advantages of self-hosting

### More control

When self-hosting, you have more control over your instance - you're running
and securing the server yourself. This means you have a broader choice of
location (so your users get good connection) and hardware, as well as direct
access to the database.

Also, if your country's laws or company's policies require that your digital
services be hosted onsite, then self-hosting may be necessary for compliance
reasons.

### Server administration experience

If you're interested in getting experience running servers or using Linux,
self-hosting is a great way to do it - it's well supported but is still a
challenge and a learning experience.

### Cost (sometimes)

If you already have access to a server (for instance, some universities give
their students free VPS credits), or if your needs in terms of scale mean that
you can get a perfect fit using a VPS, then using a VPS might be cheaper.

With a VPS, you'll have a monthly cost for the server itself, as well as a
yearly cost for a domain name. With managed hosting, you'll have the cost of
the service as well as the cost of a domain name, though with Fedihost along
with other managed hosting providers, you can get a subdomain for free.

> **Domains here, there, everywhere!** Royal Robot, the RR (robot resources)
> manager of Consultatron, doesn't need her own domain for her personal
> PeerTube instance for posting cute cat videos. She can just get away with
> using mrrrrow.fedihost.co. But her company needs a more professional online
> presence, so they own their own domain consultatron.com, and host their
> Mastodon presence at social.consultatron.com - which they set up in the
> Fedihost configuration process.

<!-- if there is a fedihost pricing page, that should be linked here -->

With a VPS and some time investment, you can save money compared to a managed
hosting provider, but make sure you know your needs hardware wise. Otherwise,
you may end up having a really slow and unresponsive server, or end up paying
too much for what you need.

For PeerTube in particular, you may have higher needs for the **video
transcoder**, which takes the original video and turns it into a format that
your instance can stream to viewers in multiple resolutions. Managed hosting
providers such as Fedihost have shared transcoders, so that you don't need to
pay for extra CPU resources full time when you only need them on your limited
video upload schedule.

## Advantages of managed hosting

### Ease and time

Managed hosting is, put simply, easier for most people. You don't need to
manage the inner technical workings of Mastodon - just whatever
[configuration](/articles/mastodon/creating/configuring) you see in the online
panel. This means you have to spend less time doing server administration work
and can focus on running your instance.

### Less server maintenance worries

With managed hosting, you don't need to worry about keeping the instance up to
date, keeping it secure (other than making sure your configuration is sound and
your admins/moderators' passwords are secure), or figuring out why if things
break.

### Shared storage

If you're running multiple instances (especially different kinds, such as
Mastodon and PeerTube) with different needs for storage, FediHost and some
other managed hosting providers pool your storage across your instances. This
way, you don't pay for storage you don't need on one instance and run out of
storage on another. With a VPS, you have to manage storage capacities and
shared resources yourself.
