---
title: "Configuring your new PeerTube instance"
description: "All the ways you can fine-tune your PeerTube instance to meet your needs"
draft: true
---
Configuring your new PeerTube instance
===

## User Accounts and Channels

When creating a PeerTube instance, by default a "root" user account was created
for you. This is the *instance admin account* with full administrative powers
over the instance.

For your own use, you'll want to create a new user account. You can do this by
logging into the root account using the password you set, going to the
Administration menu in the left-hand side toolbar, and then in the Users menu
that shows up, clicking on "Create user".

You'll need to set a username and a channel name, which can't be the same. On
PeerTube, your username is tied to you as a person, whereas your channel is how
videos you upload get shown to viewers.

> **Example**: If you are running a channel to do promotional videos for your
> company, Consultatron, on PeerTube instance video.consultatron.com, you may
> want your username to be `consultatron_llc`, and your channel name to be
> `consultatron`.

> **Example**: If you are running a cooking channel, you may want your username
> to be your name, say `jane_doe`, and your channel name to be
> `jane_doe_cooks`.

<!-- I think the above few paragraphs are better suited for a New User's
guide, and so I'll move them there when I get working on that.-->

## Customization

In the Configuration tab of the Administration menu, you'll get many options
for customization. A lot of the options are fairly self-explanatory, but some
require more attention.

Adding categories

If your instance is primarily dedicated to sensitive or NSFW content, you
should check that box under the Information tab.
