---
title: "New User's Guide"
description: 'Information for new Mastodon users wanting to get started'
draft: true
---
New User's Guide
===

# What is Mastodon?

Mastodon isn't a single social media website like Twitter or Facebook,
it is newtwork of social media websites.
An *instance* of Mastodon can talk to another instance of Mastodon.
It can also see videos from [PeerTube](https://example.com/peertube.md)
or images from [PixelFed](https://example.com/pixelfed.md)
As a user on a Mastodon instance you can find, follow and comment on
all of this.

# Getting Started

## Finding An Instance

If you are new to mastodon you'll need to joining an instance.

If you already have friends on Mastodon, you can sign up for their
instances by going to their account online and clicking on "Create Account"
in the menu on the right.
<!-- todo: Add image showing create account box-->

Alteratively you can join a [public instance](https://joinmastodon.org/servers).
The choice may seem overwhelming, but it doesn't actually
make that much of a difference which one you sign up for.

Of course you can [Creating an Instance](/articles/mastondon/newusers/joining-vs-creating)
but it is a good idea to test the waters with an existing instance first. You
can always [migrate everything but your posts](/articles/mastodon/migrating) to your own instance later.

# Social Media Algorithms and Mastodon

## Recommendation Algorithms

Conventional social networks now use "smart" recommendation algorithms
to feed you content they think you want to see (or they want you to see).
They see what you engage with and feed you more of what retains your
attention and gets you to react. This makes it easy to find new content
and your posts have more reach.

The problem is this ease comes at a very high price. It lead to
doomscrolling, overuse, inaccurate political messaging, hateful or
threatening content.

## Mastodon

Mastodon has a low-algorithm approach similar to the early days
of social networking sites.

By default posts are shown chronologically and are specifically what you choose to follow.

### The Timeline

On a standard Mastdon instance you have three *timelines* of recent posts.
<!-- todo: Add image showing timelines. I actually don't know where these are which 
makes me wonder about this section -->
* *home* - Accounts you follow including posts they have boosted (reposted).
* *local* -  The posts and boost of accounts on your instance.
* *federated* - All the posts your instance knows about, both local posts, or
posts from accounts that someone on your instance following.

# Finding People

Since an algorithm isn't monitoring your behaviour and recommending you content,
you're in charge of finding interesting posts. On a brand new instance, you may have
to look for people you know of by searching for their profiles on the internet
(not on Mastodon) to following them.
On an established instance, on the other hand, you can lean on the other users
on the instance to find interesting content.

> **Remember**: you won't see anything on your home timeline unless you
> follow people, so following people is key to seeing things! Also,
> boosting posts for visibility is good practice so that other people
> can also find interesting users to follow.

## Hashtags

Hashtags are extemely important on Mastodon because they can also be followed.
Following a hashtag is like casting a net to look for posts from accounts you may be interested in.
These posts will then be integrated into your home timeline.

### Which Hashtags

On the *explore* tab, you can view trending hashtags that your instance knows about.
<!-- todo: image of hashtags -->

The website [Feditags](https://feditags.info/) monitors the current tags being used
across the fediverse and is a great resource for finding new tags to follow.

### Your Own Tags

You should also post with hashtags to return the favour and help people find you.

### Mastodon App

Some [mastodon apps](/articles/mastodon/newusers/apps) have a layer of recommendation built on top of them. Installing one of these may also help.

# Read more

* [Backfilling](https://example.com/backfilling.html)
* [Post Visiblity on Mastodon](https://example.com/visibility.html)
