---
title: 'Migrating Mastodon Accounts'
description: 'how to migrate your mastodon account from one server to another'
draft: true
---
Migrating Mastodon Accoutns
===

Moving a Mastodon account to a new server is a process that involves followimg
several steps in a specific order. It typically takes under an hour, but full
user migration can take several months.

## Limitations
There are a few limitations to Mastodon and things you should know about a
migration first.

### Things You Can Migrate
* Followers - Automatically
* Bookmarks - CSV Download/Upload
* Follows - CSV Download/Upload
* Lists - CSV Download/Upload
* Mutes - CSV Download/Upload
* Blocks - CSV Download/Upload
* Domain Blocks - CSV Download/Upload
* Hashtags - Manual Data Entry

### Things You Can’t Move
At this point your posts and media are [stuck on the old
account](https://github.com/mastodon/mastodon/issues/12423) if you are on
someone else's mastodon server or one of the large public instances like
mastodon.social you cannot move you posts.
<aside><strong>Portability</strong>
If you like Mastodon it is better to move onto an instance and domain that 
you have some control over sooner rather than later. One advantage of 
this is a fully portable account</aside>

If you are already hosted on a custom domain it is possible to keep everything.
You just need:

* A copy of your database data and media from your old host
* A new host that will restore this data for you (such as fedihost)

Contact our <a href="mailto://support@fedihost.co">support</a> after creating
your instance and we will help you.

## Process

### 1. Old Account: Export Data
On your old account go to download each of the CSV files in individually.
:icon{icon="Cog6ToothIcon"}`Preferences > Import and Export > Data Export`

:vid{src="https://cdn.f-h.co/web/video/mastodon/export-data.mp4"}

### 2. Create New Account
Create a new blank account on your new server.

### 3. New Account: Import Data
On your new account go to :icon{icon="Cog6ToothIcon"}`Preferences > Import And
Export > Import`

and upload one by one each of the CSV files that you downloaded from the old
server.

### 4. New Account: Prepare Alias
On your new account go to :icon{icon="Cog6ToothIcon"}`Preferences > Account >
Moving From A Different Account`

Click on _Create an account alias_ an follow the instructions. You will need to
wait at least 5 minutes before completing the mirrored action of this on your
old server. While you wait you can [Move Hashtags](#move-hashtags) and [Change
Display Name and Bio](#change-display-name-and-bio) as outlined below.

### 5. Old Account: Move Hashtags
On your old account go to you profile page and choose the
:icon{icon="EllipsisVerticalIcon"} 3 dots beside your profile and select
'followed hashtags' you can also reach this by adding 'followed_tags' to the url
of your server. ![the hashtag
page](/article/img/mastodon/migration/migration-hashtags-raw.png) Then add each
of these to your new account by searching the hashtag then choosing "Follow
hashtag".

### 6. New Account: Set Display Name and Bio
On your new account copy and paste your display name, bio and links from your
old account. You can also set your profile and banner image too.

### 7. Old Account: Change Display Name and Bio
On your old account make it extra clear that your account is not active by
editing the profile and changing the Display Name to _Your Name **(Moved)**_.
Change your bio text to add a link to the new account address. ![handle and bio
field](/article/img/mastodon/migration/migration-hashtags-raw.png)

### 8. Old Account: Move Followers
_Five minutes should have now passed since you setup the "Account Alias" on your
old account._ On your old account go to :icon{icon="Cog6ToothIcon"}`Preferences
> Account > Moving To A Different Account`

Put your new handle in the box and click continue, this will both redirect the
account and migrate your followers. It can take several days for the followers
to migrate.

## Issues

### Missing Followers
When you move accounts you will usually discover that you appear to have lost
some followers. This is usually down to the ghost follower phenomenon. When a
server leaves the fediverse it doesn't always broadcast this information and so
servers that have a tally of users who are following them assume followers are
there who may no-longer be. You often only find this out during a move.

### Incomplete Move
Another common issue with large accounts is an incomplete move. Sometimes you
need to run the follower migration several times. This can be annoying due to
the cooldown time between moves.
