---
title: "New User's Guide"
description: 'Information for users new to Mastodon on joining or creating an instance and understanding how to get started'
draft: true
---
New User's Guide
===

Mastodon isn't a single social network, but rather a program for running a
social network which can talk to other social networks.
An *instance* (social media site) running Mastodon can talk to other
Mastodon instances, as well as [PeerTube](https://example.com/peertube.md)
video sharing or [PixelFed](https://example.com/pixelfed.md) image sharing
instances, using a language called ActivityPub. Thanks to this language,
you can follow people not just on your own instance but also other
instances.

# Choosing or creating an instance

If you have no idea where to start, you should consider joining an existing
instance. If you have friends on Mastodon, you can sign up for their
instances; otherwise, look for a [public instance](https://joinmastodon.org/servers)
to join. The choice may seem overwhelming at first, but it doesn't actually
make that much of a difference which one you sign up for.

If you have a group of friends who would join you on Mastodon, however, or
if you're feeling adventurous, FediHost is here for you! You can create a
new instance of your own [here](https://example.com/signup.html).

> **You should know**: Running an instance isn't for everyone - it gives
> you much greater control over what kinds of content you see and your
> social media experience overall, but it also means you have to do a lot
> of the legwork of finding that content yourself or between you and your
> friends. That said, FediHost will handle the technical aspects so you
> don't need to worry about things like uptime, server administration, or
> security, and can focus on running your instance. If you want even more
> technical control over your instance (and are reasonably comfortable with
> Linux server administration or willing to learn), you can also [host your
> own instance](https://docs.joinmastodon.org/admin/prerequisites/).

# Social Media Algorithms and Mastodon

An *algorithm*, in the context of social media, is how a social network
displays content (for instance, posts) to its users.

Many conventional social networks use "smart" algorithms to recommend you
content they think you want to see (or they want you to see), for instance
based on your viewing habits. This way, it's easier to find new content
you might be interested in, and your posts have more reach.
But it also leads to things like doomscrolling, unwanted and/or inaccurate
political messaging; or hateful or threatening content.

Mastodon takes a low-algorithm approach: posts are showed chronologically.
You have three *timelines* - on your *home* timeline, you see
the most recent posts people you follow made or others' posts they boosted.
On your *local* timeline, you see the most recent publicly visible posts
that people on your instance have made. On your *federated* timeline, you
see the most recent publicly visible posts your instance knows about -
whether by being local posts, or by someone on your instance following
someone who posted or boosted them.

# Finding people and posts

Since a smart algorithm isn't recommending you content, you're more in
charge of finding interesting posts. On a brand new instance, you may have
to look for people you know of (whether friends or public figures) by
searching for their profiles on the internet (not on Mastodon) and
following them. On an established instance, on the other hand, you can
lean on the other users on the instance to find interesting content.

> **Remember**: you won't see anything on your home timeline unless you
> follow people, so following people is key to seeing things! Also,
> boosting posts for visibility is good practice so that other people
> can also find interesting users to follow.

Besides following people, you can also follow hashtags - on the *explore*
tab, you can view hashtags that your instance knows about. This lets you
cast a wider net and look for just the posts you are interested in - post
with hashtags yourself to return the favour!

# Read more

* [Backfilling](https://example.com/backfilling.html)
* [Post Visiblity on Mastodon](https://example.com/visibility.html)
