---
title: "New User's Guide"
description: 'Information for new Mastodon users wanting to get started'
draft: true
---
New User's Guide
===

# What is Mastodon?

Mastodon isn't a single social media website like Twitter or Facebook -
it's a network of social media websites.
An *instance* of Mastodon can talk to another instance of Mastodon. So,
a Mastodon user can follow another user and like or reply to their posts,
whether they are on the same instance or a different one.
A Mastodon instance can also see videos from PeerTube or images from
PixelFed, and a Mastodon user can follow, like, and comment on all of
these.

# Getting Started

## Finding An Instance

If you are new to Mastodon you'll need to join an instance.

If you already have friends on Mastodon, you can sign up for their
instances by going to their account in your web browser and clicking on
"Create Account" in the menu on the right.
<!-- todo: Add image showing create account box-->

Alteratively you can join a [public instance](https://joinmastodon.org/servers).
The choice may seem overwhelming, but it doesn't actually
make that much of a difference which one you sign up for.

You can also [create your own instance](/articles/mastodon/joining-vs-creating)
but it is a good idea to test the waters with an existing instance first.
You can always [migrate everything but your posts](/articles/mastodon/migrating)
to your own instance later, once you're more familiar with how Mastodon
works.

# Social Media Algorithms and Mastodon

## Recommendation Algorithms

Conventional social networks now use "smart" recommendation algorithms
to feed you content they think you want to see (or they want you to see).
They see what you engage with and feed you more of what holds your
attention and gets you to react. This makes it easy to find new content
and your posts have more reach.

The problem is this ease comes at a very high price. It can lead to
doomscrolling, overuse, inaccurate political messaging, and hateful or
threatening content.

## Mastodon

Mastodon has a low-algorithm approach similar to the early days of social
networking sites.

By default posts are shown chronologically and are specifically what you
choose to follow.

### The Timeline

On a standard Mastdon instance you have three *timelines* of recent posts.
<!-- todo: Add image showing timelines. I actually don't know where these
are which makes me wonder about this section -->
* *Home* - Accounts you follow including posts they have boosted
  (reposted).
* *This server* - Posts from accounts on your instance.
* *Other servers* - Posts from accounts that people on your instance
  follow.

# Finding People

Since an algorithm isn't monitoring your behaviour and recommending you
content, you're in charge of finding interesting posts. On a brand new
instance, you may have to look for people you know of by searching for
their profiles on the internet (not on Mastodon) to follow them.
On an established instance, on the other hand, you can lean on the other
users on the instance to find interesting content.

> **Remember**: you won't see anything on your home timeline unless you
> follow people, so following people is key to seeing things! Also,
> boosting posts for visibility is good practice so that other people
> can also find interesting users to follow.

## Hashtags

Hashtags are extemely important on Mastodon because they can also be
followed. Following a hashtag is like casting a net to look for posts from
accounts you may be interested in. These posts will then be integrated
into your home timeline.

### Finding hashtags

On the *explore* tab, you can view trending hashtags that your instance
knows about.
<!-- todo: image of hashtags -->

The website [Feditags](https://feditags.info/) monitors the current tags
being used across the fediverse and is a great resource for finding new
tags to follow.

### Posting with hashtags

You should also post with hashtags to return the favour and help people
find you.
If you put hashtags at the end of your post, they won't show up in full
size or disrupt the flow of your post.

### Mastodon App

Some [Mastodon apps](/articles/mastodon/apps) have a layer of
recommendation built on top of them. Installing one of these may also
help.

# Read more

* [Backfilling](https://example.com/backfilling.html)
* [Post Visiblity on Mastodon](https://example.com/visibility.html)
