---
title: "Signs you need to upgrade your Mastodon instance"
description: "How to identify why problems are happening and when upgrading can fix them"
draft: true
---
Signs you need to upgrade your Mastodon instance
===

It's hard to give a good estimate on how much system resources (such as CPU,
RAM, or disk space) Mastodon uses, because it depends so much on how you use
your Mastodon instance. Having too little of any of these can cause issues,
leading to things failing in unexpected ways. Here are some signs you're
running out of resources and should upgrade your plan.

# Lag when doing common activities, emails not being sent, posts from other servers not showing up

Every user on your instance puts additional strain on the server. Much like a
post office, Mastodon needs to deliver posts to their addressees in a timely
manner, and it keeps a queue to prioritize its tasks.

Mastodon handles **local tasks** first (interactions between users on your
instance, new posts, etc.), then **remote tasks** (posts from other instances,
interacting with users on other instances), then **email delivery** for new
member signups, and then maintenance tasks like backups, cleanup, and trends.

Tasks will fail from the bottom up. So, if people report that they aren't
getting signup emails, then local and remote tasks are taking up all the
server's capacity. If your users can only see each others' posts and not posts
from people they follow elsewhere on the fediverse, then your local tasks are
bottlenecking the instance.

If any of these are failing, chances are that your current resources are
insufficient, and you may want to upgrade to a higher plan.

# Storage space

Mastodon stores anything its users upload on your server. With Fedihost, all
storage on your account is shared, and Mastodon will store uploads in this
space. If your users post a lot of pictures or especially videos, then you may
run out of storage faster than expected.

Also, Mastodon makes a copy of any media from posts it knows about, so that
when your instance's users see those posts, it doesn't need to download the
media files over and over again. These get routinely cleaned up on old posts
over time, but too many can overwhelm your storage capacity.

It can be hard to tell when you've run out of storage. If large uploads are
getting rejected, or if you can't post or see others' posts at all, you may
want to log onto your [Fedihost dashboard](/dashboard/home) and see if your
storage is full. If your storage is full, **don't wait** to either clean up
your storage or upgrade your plan! If things start failing, then it could break
federation, causing other issues down the road.

<!-- link to article about breaking federation when complete -->

> **Good habit**: Monitor your Fedihost storage frequently by logging in to
> your dashboard and checking your storage usage. That way, you won't be caught
> by surprise running out of storage.

## Caution: Relays

When setting up a new instance, joining a relay can be good to find new posts,
but be careful about joining one that's too big. Joining a relay means that
your instance can see all posts from that relay - and your instance will
download all the media content. This can be fine if your relay is mostly
instances of a similar size, but join a relay with huge instances and you'll
run through your storage space in no time.
