---
title: "Mastodon Resource Usage"
description: "How Mastodon uses hardware resources, and where bottlenecks happen"
draft: true
---
Mastodon Resource Usage
===

It's hard to give a good estimate on how much system resources (such as CPU,
RAM, or disk space) Mastodon uses, because it depends so much on how you use
your Mastodon instance. Having too little of any of these can cause issues,
leading to things failing in unexpected ways.

> **Note for self-hosters**: This article focuses on what resources Mastodon
> uses when fully optimized. If you're running a Mastodon instance on your own
> server, you'll need to do [a little more work](https://docs.joinmastodon.org/admin/scaling)
> to make sure your resources are being used as efficiently as possible.
> Fedihost, like other managed hosting providers, does most of this work for
> you. However, there's only so much you can optimize - sometimes, you just
> need a more powerful server to keep up with your needs.

# Resource usage factors

## Base usage

Simple websites just idle and wait for requests. Mastodon is a lot more
complicated, and has to do a lot in the background to keep running smoothly.

It has a web server ready to handle any page visits (whether they are users on
your instance or not), but it's also constantly looking for new posts to either
put in the correct place on the local instance or to send to other instances.

So, just like how even if an office space isn't at full capacity, there's still
the same overhead to keeping the lights on, no matter how little you use
Mastodon, there's a certain amount of processing power you need to keep the
server running.

## Users on your instance

Every user on your instance puts additional strain on the server. Much like a
post office, Mastodon needs to deliver posts to their addressees in a timely
manner, and it keeps a queue to prioritize its tasks.

It processes **local tasks first**, so two users on your instance will be able
to follow each other and see each other's posts even if other things are
lagging behind.

Then, it processes **remote tasks** (first, delivering local events to other
instances, and then fetching events from other instances) - this affects
whether posts from your instance make their way to followers on different
instances or not, and vice versa.

Then, it handles **email delivery** (such as for new member signups). Email
verification is necessary to sign up for Mastodon, so if this is failing, new
users may be unable to sign up.

Lastly, it handles lower priority tasks, such as backups, cleanup, and trends.

### Failure

The more users you have, the more they post, and the more accounts (especially
on different instances) they follow, the more time each of these will take.
Tasks will fail from the bottom up. So, if people report that they aren't
getting signup emails, then local and remote tasks are taking up all the
server's capacity. If your users can only see each others' posts and not posts
from people they follow elsewhere on the fediverse, then your local tasks are
bottlenecking the instance.

If any of these are failing, chances are that your current resources are
insufficient, and you may want to upgrade to a higher plan.

## Media uploads and relay membership

Mastodon stores anything its users upload on your server. With Fedihost, all
storage on your account is shared, and Mastodon will store uploads in this
space. If your users post a lot of pictures or especially videos, then you may
run out of storage faster than expected.

Also, Mastodon makes a copy of any media from posts it knows about, so that
when your instance's users see those posts, it doesn't need to download the
media files over and over again. These get routinely cleaned up on old posts
over time, but too many can overwhelm your storage capacity.

When setting up a new instance, joining a relay can be good to find new posts,
but be careful about joining one that's too big. Joining a relay means that
your instance can see all posts from that relay - and your instance will
download all the media content. This can be fine if your relay is mostly
instances of a similar size, but join a relay with huge instances and you'll
run through your storage space in no time.

### Failure

It can be hard to tell when you've run out of storage. If large uploads are
getting rejected, or if you can't post or see others' posts at all, you may
want to log onto your [Fedihost dashboard](/dashboard/home) and see if your
storage is full. If your storage is full, **don't wait** to either clean up
your storage or upgrade your plan! If things start failing, then it could break
federation, causing other issues down the road.

<!-- link to article about breaking federation when complete -->

# Bottom line

## Choosing a plan, and when to upgrade

When choosing a plan, the [listed number of users](/pricing) is a suggestion.
If your usage is really low, you may be able to get away with a lower plan than
suggested for your number of users.

If your users post frequently, follow lots of people on lots of
instances, and in general use Mastodon heavily, you may run into lag and
slowdowns on your instance - you should consider upgrading to a higher plan.

## Good with friends

Since Mastodon has high baseline resource usage, instances with just one user
are inefficient. Getting your friends on your instance can make sure you're not
paying for resources you aren't using.
