---
title: 'Create An Instance'
description: 'How to start your own Mastodon instance using Fedihost'
draft: true
---
Create An Instance 
===

Mastodon is a fediverse microblogging platform capable of sharing text,
images and video. It takes most users between 5-10 minutes to start an
instance depending on their level of experience with changing DNS records.

## Login or Register
[Login](/login) or [Sign-Up](/register) for Fedihost using an email address
and password. This email address will recieve important billing and
administrative emails in relation to the instance.

## Choose New Service
On the left menu, navigate to the "New Service" tab and choose "Mastodon"
as the service you would like to add.

## Select Plan
You can now choose, which plan you would like for your Mastodon server.

### Support Level
We prioritize support based on plan size and support is provided within
reason. Fedihost does not maintain the code that we host on your behalf.
Repeated requests for support that are not related to the hosting, may be
billed at rates [outlined in our terms of service](/tos).

### User Count
Mastodon is a service that has a significant base resource usage and then a
slight increase in resource usage per additional active user. Our plans are
based on average users, if you notice your server is not performing well we
will alert you in your console that your instance needs to be upgraded to
avoid poor performance.

<aside><strong>Mileage Varies</strong>
We base our pricing off the average resource usage per user on our network
but it is just a recommendation. If all your users are posting videos
every few minutes you will find your server sluggish and will probably want
to upgrade to the next plan.</aside>

<!-- <aside><strong>Mastodon 0</strong>
Our base plan `Mastodon 0` is a plan for archiving a server. It allows you
to keep a bookmark in the fediverse but it is not made for day to day
usage.</aside> -->

### Storage
If you don't already have a Fedihost [storage plan](/pricing) you may
select one here. It is easy to upgrade and downgrade storage as you go,
which is often required on a Mastodon instance over time if it is adding
users.

## Domain Settings
Domain settings let you decide what address you would like your Mastodon
instance to appear at. You can bring a custom domain or use a fedihost
domain.

### Custom Domain
If you own a domain, you will need to have access to the DNS settings for
the domain to point them to Fedihosts servers. This is usually something
you can configure in the same place that you registered the domain, but
not always.

The domain cannot be at the same address as a website that already exists.
If you already have a website at an address the most common solution is
to use a subdomain for your Mastodon instance.

<aside><strong>Subdomain Example:</strong>
Because <a href="https://consultatron.com/">consultatron.com</a> already
has a website at this address they used
<a href="https://social.consultatron.com/">social.consultatron.com</a>
as the domain for their Mastodon instance.</aside>

#### Enter Domain
Enter in the domain that you would like to use into the box.

#### Update DNS
On your DNS provider update the records to match the table which is
displayed below. If you do not have the option for an ALIAS record use
CNAME instead. Save the record and back on fedihost select "verify
domain".

<aside><strong>DNS Mistakes</strong>
A common error occurs when the DNS provider automatically appends the
domain to the record you pasted in. So for example instead of the CNAME
record saying `social.consultatron.com` it actually is saying
`social.consultatron.com.consultatron.com`.</aside>
It can take a few hours for the DNS record to propagate, if 24 hours pass
check your DNS settings a second time.
<aside><strong>DNS Delays</strong>
DNS record record can take a long time to propagate, we are working on a
system that will let you skip and come back to this step for a future
update </aside>

### Fedihost Domain
If you do not have a domain, you can always use a fedihost subdomain.
These deploy instantly and require no extra expense or custom domain.
<aside><strong>Portability Warning:</strong>
Using a fedihost subdomain means if you decide to move your Mastodon
instance you won't be able to keep the same domain if you move
elsewhere.</aside>

## Review And Checkout
The next step lets you review your order and pay through stripe. Once you
complete payment, your Mastodon instance is ready for the final
configuration step.

### Fedihost configuration
On your Fedihost dashboard you will see your instance is waiting on some final
configuration options which need to be completed prior to provisioning
your instance. Click "Configure".

#### Mastodon Account
You can set the first admin user account email and name for the Mastodon
instance.

#### Webfinger
Webfinger redirection allows you to display a Mastodon instance that runs
on a subdomain such as `social.consultation.com` as `consultatron.com`
instead. We do not recommend using this feature unless you are confident
writing code or can verify with a your existing web developer that it is
possible to write the code on your website.

### Create Instance
Click "Create Instance" and your Mastodon instance will provision
momentarily. An email will be sent to you confirming everything.


## Next Steps
- [Our guide on configuring a brand new Mastodon instance for
  administrators.](/articles/mastodon/creating/configuring)
- [Our guide on setting up and using a Mastodon account for
  users.](/articles/mastodon/newusers)
